Temperature-related mortality in federal prisons
By Kristen N Cowan, Jeremie Boudreault, Kate LeMasters & Lauren Brinkley-Rubinstein

**About
**Background: Temperature extremes in prisons are becoming more common due to climate change. Due to infrastructural issues (lack of air conditioning) and the demographic of who is incarcerated (aging populations, high prevalence of chronic diseases), incarcerated people are at high risk of poor health outcomes during extreme temperature events. Our goal was to estimate associations between ambient temperature and all-cause mortality in federal US prisons. Methods: Data on mortality in federal prisons from the Third City Project from 2009 to 2021 were linked with NASA Daymet daily mean temperature. A case crossover design and distributed lag non-linear models were employed to estimate the temperature-mortality relationship for deaths occurring during the hot (May-September) and cold (November-March) months throughout the US. Odds ratios of temperature exposure were compared to the median daily temperature at each prison location from 2009-2021. Results: 5,182 deaths were recorded from 2009 to 2021. While extreme temperatures (5th and 95th percentiles) were not associated with an increase in mortality in federal prison when examining the cumulative effect (7-day lag for hot months and 14-day for cold) across the US, an increase in mortality was noted at 2-day lag for hot temperatures (95th percentile), and the same-day lag for cold temperature (5th percentile). Conclusions: Future studies are needed to quantify characteristics that make individuals vulnerable to mortality during extreme temperatures in US federal prisons. Policies are needed to reduce exposure to temperature extremes in in prisons including infrastructural improvements and proactive, climate-informed healthcare access.
